# Introduction

This repository contains the majority of my personal code, documentation and data on my research paper *"Dynamic models for analysing stock market behaviour under the COVID-19 pandemic"*, as part of my thesis for the Data Science master track of Information Studies, of the University of Amsterdam. To provide transparency and reproducible research, I've published these documents for any who which to take a closer look at my work. The research will be presented during the 14th International Conference on Computer Modeling and Simulation (ICCMS 2022) at Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, China. **Disclaimer**: Be advised that these documents were run on a local environment and files have been restructured or cleaned to provide a more useful overview. Some code may not work directly, or some documentation may be lacking. Also if you would like to reproduce my research, feel free to contact me at `maarten [dot] peters [at] gmail [dot] com`. If you find my research useful as a citation or reference, please include the following in your blbliography:

**`bibtex`**:
```
@article{peters2022dynamicmodels,
  title={Dynamic models for analysing stock market behaviour under the COVID-19 pandemic},
  author={Peters, Maarten and others},
  ISBN={9781450396547}
  journal={ICCMS '22: 2022 The 14th International Conference on Computer Modeling and Simulation},
  year={2022},
  publisher={Association for Computing Machinery},
  address = {New York, NY, USA},
  location = {Chongqing, China}
}
```

# Abstract

During the COVID-19 pandemic questions were raised on how to balance government measures ensuring population health and allowing economic development. At the start of the pandemic, Saudi-Arabia and Russia were in a pricing war over crude oil which, along with speculation on the economic impact of COVID-19, led to a unprecedented negative crude oil price in the West Texas Intermediate (WTI) . As the WTI serves as a benchmark for crude oil prices in North America, and a proxy for economic development, it is an interesting candidate to use for price forecasting. The pandemic provides a unique perspective, as it introduces a new set of variables, such as infections, deaths, vaccinations and government measures\*, that might aid in predicting economic development. Related studies generally focus on macroeconomic development, such as gross domestic product (GDP), unemployment or inflation over years or decades, rather than short-term development over days, weeks or months. This study attempts to combine data from the COVID-19 pandemic, weather, stock pricing data and machine learning techniques to determine the relationship between these variables and their value towards more accurate price forecasting. As stock prices have high variance, extreme values might indicate local or global stock market crashes, an optimal model would be able to predict these crashes. To determine the outcome of our research question, we compare the value of our data between a baseline model, linear model and two state-of-the-art (SOTA) models, the random forest regressor (RFR) and auto-regressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model. Both SOTA models tend to perform better or similar with less features, indicating the data does not add significant value to the prediction of stock market values.

\*Provided by the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment (in Dutch: Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu, RIVM), the Johns Hopkins University Coronavirus Resource Center (JHU) and the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT).

# Contents

- **`code`**: Contains all the necessary code to recreate the research, from data collection to evaluation and plot generation.
- **`data`**: Contains all collected data for the research, all publicly available and collected into this single dataset.
- **`logs`**: A collection of logfiles generated during the last full execution of the code necessary to produce the results for the research.
- **`paper`**: The original LaTeX files for my thesis at the University of Amsterdam, the revised version for the ICCMS 2022 conference and the defense presentation concluding my thesis.
- **`plots`**: All the plots generated for the paper by the included code.
- **`results`**: All the results included into the research, which can also be regenerated by the included code.

The remaining files could be beneficial for setting up the proper environment and software dependencies, as well as some insight into the exploratory data analysis performed at the start of the research.